I have been to the Arctic for three weeks,
and while I'm away a few guest presenters take over the channel.
We start with Sally le Page,
a biologist from Oxford university
who is going to talk about the world's longest working battery.
Be nice, I'll see you in three weeks.
Go ahead, Sally!
I am here in Clarendon lab in Oxford,
where physicists save a battery with the longest lifespan in the world.
He supplies energy for the 'Oxford electric bell',
and has been running almost uninterrupted for more than 176 years.
He was bought by Reverend Robert Walker
who was a reader in experimental philosophy at Oxford.
That's what they called physicists at that time,
and hopefully that will show you how long ago we are now.
He bought it in 1840.
Let's take a look at that in the context.
If we go back 60 years, it's 1780.
'Mad King George' is still on the British throne,
the US declared independence 4 years before,
and Napoleon is still in school.
In Italy, physicist Luigi Galvani
frog legs are being dissected with metal tools,
but when he touched a nerve, he saw the muscles of the frog convulsing.
He thought that this was animal electricity.
Another Italian physicist, Alessandro Volta, heard about this experiment
and he realized that the frog legs were just extensive electrolytes
running a stream between the copper and iron tools that Galvani used.
Volta made the very first battery in 1800.
The Voltaic Stack, made by stacking discs of copper and zinc
- Okay here I have aluminum foil -
and to separate them with slices of cardboard soaked in brine.
And by stacking them up like here
you can see that you have made a battery. And it still works!
And then, in 1825, the London makers Watkin and Hill made this:
The Oxford Electric Bell and the dry stack battery that provides power to him.
And even though it was only 25 years after Volta made the very first battery ever
this battery would function longer than any other battery the world will ever see.
and he has won a Guinness World Record for the world's most durable battery.
How does such an old battery last?
It is a dry stack battery, so there is paste inside
with the minimum amount of water needed for the electrolyte to work.
And all that water is retained by this solid sulfur coating.
But beyond that, we do not really know what's inside.
If we look at schemes from other batteries in history
it probably made about 2000 of these slices of zinc and manganese dioxide, all of which have been piled up.
But to investigate exactly what it was made of
we have to cut it open and stop the 176-year period.
At that time, the bubbles have been hit 10 billion times.
But, this is an active physics laboratory,
so happy for all the physicists here
it the bell now inaudible and put behind two glass windows.
Every time the bell rings, the clapper takes a minuscule nano-ampere current,
but the voltage between the two bubbles is a colossal 2 kilovolts.
That is almost 10 times the voltage of the electricity grid in the United Kingdom.
How long will he continue to walk?
Well, nobody really knows that.
The people here think that the bubble will ever break due to wear and tear
long before the battery runs out.
In 1841, a year after Oxford bought the bell,
wrote the instrument makers in a letter:
"The remaining electric current is sufficient to ring the bells
to last for no more than three or four years.
It is a beautiful device, but unfortunately
very transient in her executive powers. "
How wrong could they have it?
That was Sally le Page, she has great videos on her channel.
View for yourself, links can be found on the screen or in the description.
Thanks also to the Physics Department at the University of Oxford that we were allowed to film the bell.
Next time we have someone with teeth, who dissolve in soft drinks.